Add support for type preinitialization in crossgen2 (#124568)
dotnet/runtime: docs/design/features/readytorun-preinitialized-statics.md

# ReadyToRun Preinitialized Statics

Author: Enze He ([@hez2010](https://github.com/hez2010)) - 2026

## Instruction

Preinitialized statics feature was added in R2R format version **18.2**.

ReadyToRun now can interpret eligible `.cctor` bodies at compile time, serialize the resulting static state into the R2R image, and mark types as preinitialized so runtime class-init can be skipped.

> The interpreter reuses the one in ilc so that any shape of `.cctor` that ilc can preinitialize is also supported in R2R, with some additional constraints. There're various limitations on what can be preinitialized, and the supported scenarios are listed as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preintialization interpreter is shared with the NativeAOT ILCompiler, so class constructors that can be preinitialized for NativeAOT are also supported in R2R, with some additional constraints. There're various limitations on what can be preinitialized, and the supported scenarios are listed as follows.
```

1. Validate that the encoded address is inside an R2R import section.
2. Compute `importIndex` and `importDelta` from section `EntrySize`.
3. Ensure the cell is fixed up.
4. Return `resolved = importCellValue + importDelta`.

This allows payload fields to encode "base + offset" against import cells.

## Implementation details

### Record creation and dependency rooting

`ReadyToRunPreinitializationManager.GetTypeRecord(type)` computes and caches whether a type is preinitialized, the non-GC payload size, an optional statics payload node, and an optional failure reason. If a record has emitted static payload data, that payload node is rooted in the dependency graph.

This is best-effort: if serialization/validation of the preinitialized graph fails (for example, unsupported layout or invalid serialized shape), the type is downgraded to non-preinitialized and the failure reason is recorded for diagnostics/statistics.

### Generic instantiation coverage

Generic instantiations are supported on a best-effort basis. Only concrete, non-canonical, non-runtime-determined instantiations that are statically referenced from the code are recorded in the map and have preinitialization support.

> To ensure the map covers needed generic instantiations, static-base helper paths trigger record materialization in `GenericLookupResult`, `ReadyToRunGenericHelperNode`, and `ReadyToRunSymbolNodeFactory`.

Author: This part is a bit outdated. I forgot to update here after I deleted the `GenericLookupResult` from my previous experiment. I'll update it later.
